---
title: "About"
layout: single
author_profile: true
permalink: /about/
last_modified_at: 2020-03-21T17:03:31-05:00
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
header:
  image: "/assets/images/abdul-grand-canyon-1.jpg"
  caption: "Me at the Grand Canyon"
---
# Introduction

My name is Abdul Rabbani, I am a self-educated computer scientist. Most
of my knowledge has been acquired from real-world experience, books, and
online resources. I believe not having learned technology in a classroom
has been an advantage for me, as I have spent more time learning about
real-world technology that is practical, by those who are experts in the
matter. My experience and fields of expertise range from low-level
applications and operating systems, to designing, creating and scaling
cloud infrastructure in an automated fashion.

Besides technology, I have a deep love for math and science. I am hoping
to continue to grow and expand my knowledge in both fields. I am also
hoping to grow in fields that are outside my comfort zone. As someone
who grow up in love with numbers, data, and analytics, I oftentimes
neglected my creative side. I am hoping to become more in touch with
this side by drawing, reading, writing, and dabbling in poetry.

## Personal Information

Age: 23

Nationality: Pakistani

Current Residence: Queens

Favorite Programming Languages: Python, C, C++

Sports: Wrestling

# Purpose of This Site

The main purpose of this website is for me to keep track of my work in
one place. As I continue to learn, grow, and express myself over the
years, I can easily go back and re-learn something that I wrote about
years earlier. I also believe that writing what you learn helps you
further cement the knowledge and understanding. I am hoping to capture
my growth as an engineer, a scientist, and a person through this
website.

I am also looking forward to collaborating with people who may have the
same interests as me. If you see a topic that piques your interest, feel
free to comment about things you like, dislike, agree with, disagree
with, or want further explanation on. My email is also linked, so feel
free to reach out to me personally if you want to connect.

## Types of Posts

You'll notice various *types* of posts as you go along. I will do my
best to capture the *type* of the post as a tag. Let me give you an
example: My favorite branch of Mathematics is Calculus.

-   **Personal**: I could write an article on the importance of Calculus
    to me and the influence it has had in my life. This type of post
    would be a **Personal** post, where I am writing about an aspect of
    my life.

-   **Opinionated**: I could also write a post on how I believe all High
    Schools should offer Calculus classes. This type of post would be an
    **Opinionated** post, where I am sharing an idea, or something that
    I believe.

-   **Factual**: I could also write a post explaining the *Fundamental
    Theorem Of Calculus*. This type of post would be a **Factual** post,
    where I am explaining something (correctly I hope).

-   **Discovery**: I may also write about a brand new finding I might
    have in Calculus. This type of post would be a **Discovery** post,
    where I am explaining in thorough detail, my scientific discovery.

-   **Notes**: I may be learning about a new topic within Calculus, and
    I might create a post with explanations, questions, and other notes
    I have about the topic. This type of post would be a **Notes** post
    (I know, very creative). This will more than likely be the most
    common type of post on this site.

# Technical Experience

As someone who has had various roles in different organizations, I have
amassed experience and expertise in various topics. From creating and
scaling large infrastructure in an automated fashion, to analyzing
latency and performance for low-latency trading applications. The broad
range of knowledge that I have gathered has allowed me to see a bigger
portion of the technical picture.

## Currently

Currently, I am unemployed and taking some time to grow, learn, and work
on personal projects. Now that I have spent a few years in the technical
space, working in different roles, I have gotten a taste of what I like,
and more importantly, what I don't like. I also have a better
understanding of what is out there, tech is so wide and has many aspects
to it. When I first started I didn\'t know what I didn't know, now I
know what I know, and know what I don\'t know (you might want to read
that twice).

I'd like to take some time to grow in the technical areas that interest
me the most. This includes kernel development, network programming, C,
and other low-level tools and concepts. Unlike in college where you are
learning the broad strokes of tech, and learning on the job where you
learn what you are exposed to, I want to take the time to learn what
**interests me**. I also plan on reading, writing, drawing, and growing
in other fields that are non-technical.

### Interview Prep

Besides wearing my student hat and spending time to learn and grow, I
would also like to help those who are in the technical field. I have
started a project where I will be helping engineers in the technical
space practice for their interviews so that they may land their dream
job. Learn more about [interview prep](/interview_prep/introduction_to_interview_prep).

## Past Experience

### Microsoft-PromoteIQ

In my most recent role, I was a DevOps Engineer at a start-up called
PromoteIQ, which is owned by Microsoft. PromoteIQ is an advertising firm
that works in the private market place. My job here was to maintain all
the servers, networks, applications, and infrastructure to be able to
serve ads for our clients.

Part of being a good DevOps Engineer is making sure you are not doing
the same work twice. Infrastructure, applications, networks, servers,
and other pieces of technology constantly need to be replicated and
changed. Technology is great because if you\'re lazy (like me), you can
program it to do a lot for you. Some of the tools that I leveraged to
make my life easier were *Ansible, Python, Terraform, and Jenkins*.

Like many companies, we live on the cloud, and not just one. To meet
client needs we have applications on *AWS, GCP, Azure, Rackspace, and
Digital Ocean*. Due to strong leadership, and smart engineers, we can
serve clients out of various clouds with ease. PromoteIQ is a smart,
sleek, and truly advanced shop in today\'s day in age, with automation
and growth in mind.

### Societe Generale

Before working for PromoteIQ, I was an SRE at Societe Generale,
primarily focusing on the technology of the high-frequency, low-latency
trading desk. My main focus was maintaining trading applications, with
latency and performance in mind. Some of my topics of interest were
*Microwave, Market Data, and Smart Order Routing (SOR)*.

At SocGen, I learned to work very closely with physical hardware.
Although I touched not a single server in my time there, I was quickly
able to decipher the right tool for the right job. I also learned to
become a proficient programmer at SocGen with the help of some very
talented individuals.

I started by learning *Python* and quickly began working on the ILP
(Internal Market Provider) project. The purpose of the project was to
produce market data for our clients and have them route orders to us the
way they would to a protected market. I used Python to improve a program
that insured that we were executing our clients at the best price on the
market (Easier said than done). Working on the ILP project gave me a
deeper and richer insight into the complexity of market data.

I eventually moved onto *C/C++*. Although I left before I could show my
skills in *C/C++*, I would like to believe that my former colleagues
would be happy with my growth.
lthough I left before I could show my skills in *C/C++*, I would like to believe that my former colleagues would be happy with my growth.
