# TDD - That's Design Dummy #

For many years now there have been internet flame wars about TDD in the software development community.

Most people I talk involved in software development seem to have
strong opinions for or against Test Driven Development and some of the
heated discussions on forums have become as passionate as arguments
over politics or religion.

On one side are the proponents of TDD as a way of life for developers.

## Test Driven Disciples ##

The strict adherence to the process and disciplines of failing test
first-implement-test pass-refactor-repeat conjures up images of the
developer equivalent of the warrior monks of China. Developers rising
before the sun to practice their code kata, lines of practitioner
hunched over keyboards applying the steps of TDD as if driven by a
metronome, each successful invocation of the 'green' genie of a
passing test accompanied by a Kiai of triumph.

What they think of as the studied concentration of practised
discipline often percieved by non-TDDers as the slavish adherence to
an unthinking cult. Mindless automatons relentlessly 'mocking' real
design to produce a disconnected, disassociated collection of classes
that clog the understanding of the problem space with unnecessary
layers of abstraction.

------------------------------

On the other are the haters of TDD. More difficult to categorise, they
form their own little bands of rebels.

## Anarchy of 'Testless' Development ##

### Code Warriors ###
The post apocalyptic band of 'code' warriors hacking code as fast as
they can to meet delivery 'dead'-lines set by the cruel warlords of
the project management cult. They have no time for testing of any
kind. Testing is for 'wimps'!

Many don't survive this brutal and unforgiving landscape, brought to an untimely end by premature release
schedules. The hardened veterans carry scars, missing the figurative
'limbs' of code quality, professional pride bleeding into the sand of
the unforgiving desert of the 'immaculate schedule'.
